Enhancement proposal for new APIs to support alerts management UI (#1822)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/monitoring/alerts-ui-management.md

  - TBD
approvers: # A single approver is preferred, the role of the approver is to raise important questions, help ensure the enhancement receives reviews from all applicable areas/SMEs, and determine when consensus is achieved such that the EP can move forward to implementation.  Having multiple approvers makes it difficult to determine who is responsible for the actual approval.
  - TBD
api-approvers: # In case of new or modified APIs or API extensions (CRDs, aggregated apiservers, webhooks, finalizers). If there is no API change, use "None"
  - TBD
creation-date: 2025-07-24
last-updated: 2025-07-24
tracking-link: # link to the tracking ticket (for example: Jira Feature or Epic ticket) that corresponds to this enhancement
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-46597
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-62972
see-also:
  -
replaces:
  -
superseded-by:
  -
---
# Enhanced Alerts UI Management for OpenShift

## Summary
Provide a user‑friendly UI and REST API for defining, viewing, editing, disabling/enabling and silencing Prometheus alerts without manual YAML edits, reducing alert fatigue and improving operational efficiency.

> Platform alerts will be updated via entries in the `AlertRelabelConfig` CR (in `cluster-monitoring-config`) rather than editing their original `PrometheusRule`.

Author: The API needs REST API to handle this logic.
This doesnt exist today.

> Platform alerts will be updated via entries in the `AlertRelabelConfig` CR (in `cluster-monitoring-config`) rather than editing their original `PrometheusRule`.

Author: This explains how the UI will interact with these CRs. The API code and logic needs to be implemented and supported in CMO.

> ## Motivation

Author: This explains the motivation of why a UI is needed. In the Goals I mention what is needed in order to meet these goals.

- The current `PrometheusRule` CRD + `oc apply` workflow is powerful yet cumbersome for day‑to‑day alert tweaks.
- Some operational teams prefer an interactive console and API to manage alerts safely, guided by best practices.
- A unified interface will help users create, clone, disable or silence alerts, view real‑time firing status and preserve changes across upgrades.

### User Stories

1. **Bulk disable during maintenance**
   As a cluster administrator, I want to select and disable multiple alerts in one action,

>    so that I can suppress non‑critical notifications across all namespaces during planned maintenance windows.

Author: You are right. I will update

2. **Single‑alert toggle from alert details**
   As an SRE on call, I want to click “Disable” or “Enable” on an individual alert’s details page,

>    so that I can quickly mute a noisy alert or restore it once the underlying issue is resolved.

Author: These are examples of what the API would need to support.

3. **Clone and customize platform alerts**
   As a cluster admin, I want to clone an existing built‑in alert, adjust its threshold and severity, and save it as a user‑defined rule,
   so that I can tailor default monitoring to suit my team’s SLAs without modifying upstream operators.

4. **Create alert from a metric query**
   As a developer, I want to write or paste a PromQL expression in a “Create Alert” form, specify duration and severity, and save it,
   so that I can turn any ad‑hoc query I used during troubleshooting into a managed alert.

5. **View silence status on active alerts**
   As a cluster admin, I want the “Active Alerts” list to show which alerts are currently silenced (and until when),
   so that I have clear visibility into which notifications are suppressed and why.

## Goals

> 1. CRUD operations on user‑defined alerts via UI and API.

Author: Yes

> 2. Clone platform or user alerts to customize thresholds or scopes.

Author: But by support we mean I mean the creation, and lifecycle management, but not faulty expressions/summary/descriptions or any other user defined detail .

> 2. Clone platform or user alerts to customize thresholds or scopes.

Reviewer: > We need to support user-defined alerting rules and create the Prometheusrules same as its already possible today in the CLI

you mean applying manifests with `oc`?

> 2. Clone platform or user alerts to customize thresholds or scopes.

Author: We would wrap the existing API(oc) that allows to create the alert rules, yes.
We want to keep APIs with same prefix as the new planned APIS, for clear definition for the UI.

> 2. Clone platform or user alerts to customize thresholds or scopes.

Reviewer: I'm not following your last comment, sorry. Which APIs are we talking about? For me CRDs are also APIs.

> 2. Clone platform or user alerts to customize thresholds or scopes.

Author: The APIs to create user defined alerts

> 2. Clone platform or user alerts to customize thresholds or scopes.

Author: I mean we would wrap only the API for creating the new user defined alerts.
Other APIs require more complicated logic, since they will handle both User alerts and alert rules and platform alerts .

3. Disable/enable alerts by creating/updating entries in the `AlertRelabelConfig` CR.

> 4. Create/manage silences in Alertmanager and reflect this in the UI.

Author: This effort will integrate the silences as part of the overall feature and will use the existing silences APIs, UI may require some updates for a unified view and managment.

> 4. Create/manage silences in Alertmanager and reflect this in the UI.

Reviewer: See my comment above, I still don't understand what's missing in the console wrt silences.

|---------|--------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| GET     | `/alerting/rules`                                | List all alert rule definitions, including `disabled` flags and relabel context.     |
| GET     | `/alerting/alerts`                               | List active alerts (Pending / Firing / Silenced), showing post‑relabel data.         |
| POST    | `/alerting/rules`                                | Create a new user‑defined alert rule.                                                |
| PATCH   | `/alerting/rules/{alertname}/{severity}`         | Partially update a single rule (e.g. toggle `disabled`, tweak expression).           |
| PATCH   | `/alerting/rules`                                | Bulk partial updates of multiple rules in one atomic request (each with its own `alertname`, `severity`, and fields to change). |
| DELETE  | `/alerting/rules/{alertname}/{severity}`         | Delete a user‑defined rule identified by its `alertname` and post‑relabel `severity`.|

> | POST    | `/alerting/rules/{alertname}/{severity}/clone`   | Clone an existing rule for quick customization (new name, adjusted severity, etc.).  |

Reviewer 2: `{alertname}/{severity}` is not common and the url usage will make no sense

all routes should support the severity as a param, and not a URL field in my opinion

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| GET       | `/api/alerting/alerts` | List active alerts (Pending / Firing / Silenced) |

| GET       | `/api/alerting/rules` | List all alerting rules definitions |
| POST     | `/api/alerting/rules` | Create a new user‑defined alerting rule. |
| PUT       | `/api/alerting/rules/{alertname}` | Update an existing user‑defined alerting rule |
| DELETE | `/api/alerting/rules/{alertname}` | Delete a user‑defined alerting rule |

| POST     | `/api/alerting/rules/{alertname}/disable` | Disable an alerting rule |
| POST     | `/api/alerting/rules/{alertname}/enable` | Enable an alerting rule |

| POST     | `/api/alerting/rules/{alertname}/clone` | Clone an existing alerting rule |

| GET        | `/api/health` | Health check endpoint |
```

Reviewer 2: <img width="746" height="849" alt="Screenshot from 2025-07-28 14-17-11" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ddd97291-c9ef-430f-baa8-71c5a6c2d01b" />

---
title: alerts-ui-managment
authors:
  - "@sradco"
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
api-approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2025-07-24
last-updated: 2025-07-30
tracking-link:
  - "https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-46597"
  - "https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-62972"
---
# New APIs to support Alerts UI Management in OpenShift

> 

Reviewer: Can we link to existing enhancement proposals which are relevant to this effort? Namely https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/monitoring/alert-overrides.md and https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/monitoring/user-workload-monitoring.md.

In particular the first one calls out UI/UX issues with the console.

## Summary
Provide a user‑friendly UI and REST API for defining, viewing, editing, disabling/enabling and silencing Prometheus alerts without manual YAML edits, reducing alert fatigue and improving operational efficiency.

> Platform alerts will be updated via entries in the `AlertRelabelConfig` CR (in `cluster-monitoring-config`) rather than editing their original `PrometheusRule`.

Reviewer: this sentence is a bit fuzzy because there's no AlertRelabelConfig in cluster-monitoring-config. I assume that we want to say that platform alerts will be overriden leveraging the AlertRelabelConfig and AlertingRule CRDs.

## Motivation

> - The current `PrometheusRule` CRD + `oc apply` workflow is powerful yet cumbersome for day‑to‑day alert tweaks.

Reviewer: We should mention AlertingRule + AlertRelabelConfig CRDs rather than PrometheusRule IMHO. The UI mismatch should also be mentioned.
```suggestion
- While it's possible to customize built-in alerting rules with the `AlertingRule` + `AlertRelabelConfig` CRDs, the process is cumbersome and error-prone. It requires creating YAML manifests manually and there's no practical way to verify the correctness of the configuration.
- The OCP console doesn't take into account alerting customization: it will display built-in alerting rules rather than hiding them or marking them as overriden. 
```

- Some operational teams prefer an interactive console and API to manage alerts safely, guided by best practices.
- A unified interface will help users create, clone, disable or silence alerts, view real‑time firing status and preserve changes across upgrades.

### User Stories

1. **Bulk disable during maintenance**
   As a cluster administrator, I want to select and disable multiple alerts in one action,
   so that I can suppress non‑critical notifications across all namespaces during planned maintenance windows.

2. **Single‑alert toggle from alert details**
   As an SRE on call, I want to click “Disable” or “Enable” on an individual alert’s details page,
   so that I can quickly mute a noisy alert or restore it once the underlying issue is resolved.

3. **Clone and customize platform alerts**

>    As a cluster admin, I want to clone an existing built‑in alert, adjust its threshold and severity, and save it as a user‑defined rule,

Author: Not nessesarily. Sometimes you will clone and add another similar alert and keep the existing alert.
For example if you want to fire one alert for warning in 70% and another for critical at 90%. 
Or just use the source alert expression and details as a reference for your new alert and you want to inspect the expression.
We will not disable the source alert as part of the clone process, users are expected to do that.

   so that I can tailor default monitoring to suit my team’s SLAs without modifying upstream operators.

4. **Create alert from a metric query**

>    As a developer, I want to write or paste a PromQL expression in a “Create Alert” form, specify duration and severity, and save it,

Reviewer: What if you could create an alerting rule from the Metrics > Observe page?

Author: Not in scope of this effort, but possible later on I assume.

   so that I can turn any ad‑hoc query I used during troubleshooting into a managed alert.

5. **View silence status on active alerts**
   As a cluster admin, I want the “Active Alerts” list to show which alerts are currently silenced (and until when),

>    so that I have clear visibility into which notifications are suppressed and why.

Reviewer: It's already the case?
By default silenced alerts are filtered out
<img width="1508" height="499" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/02904853-b7a9-49d0-8534-b6d8b58a0c63" />

But silenced alerts can be displayed 
<img width="1511" height="570" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/329684c0-7162-4b92-808f-a5e4a4383341" />

Author: Yes, but now we work on new UI and w should make sure functionality is kept there as well.

2. Clone platform or user alerts to customize thresholds or scopes.
3. Disable/enable alerts by creating/updating entries in the `AlertRelabelConfig` CR.
4. Create/manage silences in Alertmanager and reflect this in the UI. - Already exists today.
5. Aggregate view of all alerting rules, showing definitions plus relabel context.
6. Aggregate view of all alerts, showing status (Pending, Firing, Silenced) and relabel context.
7. Enforce multi‑tenancy: restrict queries to user’s namespace or cluster scope.
8. Persist user changes through operator upgrades, without modifying existing operators or CRDs.
9. Stay fully GitOps/Argo CD compliant: managed resources must remain commit‑able and, when owned by a GitOps application, appear read‑only.

## Non‑Goals
- Deep RBAC beyond native Kubernetes permissions.
- Operators reacting to user modifications (operator code remains unchanged).
- Full multi‑cluster federation (initial focus is single‑cluster).

## Related Enhancement Proposals
- https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/monitoring/alert-overrides.md
- https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/monitoring/user-workload-monitoring.md

> ## Proposal

Author: Added. Please review

> ### 1. API Endpoints

Author: Current API cant apply alertRelabelConfig on top of Alerts and alert rules.
The logic should not be done in the UI side, but in the beckend.

Base path: `/api/v1/alerting`

Rule identity

> - A rule is uniquely identified by the tuple: `(namespace, prometheusrule, ruleName, severity)`.

Reviewer: the primary key for a rule is composed of
* the namespace &name of the PrometheusRule resource
* the rule group
* the alert or record name
* the label name/value pairs

| GET    | `/rules`                           | List all alert rule definitions (platform and user), including `disabled` flags and relabel context. Supports the filter parameters listed below. | **Required** — merges `AlertRelabelConfig` with platform alerts.|
| GET    | `/rules/labels`                    | List common labels across selected rules. | |
| POST   | `/rules`                           | Create a new user‑defined alert rule. | **Required** — Wraps K8s API for `PrometheusRule`. |
| GET    | `/rules/{ruleId}`                  | Fetch a single rule’s full definition and relabel context. | |
| PATCH  | `/rules/{ruleId}`                  | Update a single rule (platform or user‑defined). | |
| DELETE | `/rules/{ruleId}`                  | Delete a user‑defined rule. | |
| GET    | `/rules/{ruleId}/labels`           | List labels (including relabel context) for the specified rule. | |
| POST   | `/rules`                           | Bulk update rules (e.g., severity/status/labels).  | |
| DELETE | `/rules`                           | Bulk delete user‑defined  rules. | |

Filter parameters for `/rules`:

- `name`
- `group`
- `namespace`
- `component`
- `severity`

> - `state` (one of: `enabled`, `disabled`, `silenced`)

Author: Updated

---
title: alerts-ui-managment
authors:
  - "@sradco"
reviewers:
  - "@jan--f"
  - "@jgbernalp"
approvers:
  - "@jan--f"
  - "@jgbernalp"
api-approvers:

>   - TBD

Author: We plan to add the new REST APIs to CMO

>   - TBD

Reviewer 3: Additionally that intention should perhaps be mentioned in this proposal.

This includes adding a new REST APIs, Platform alerts will be overriden leveraging the  `AlertRelabelConfig` CR (in `cluster-monitoring-config`) rather than editing their original AlertingRules in the `PrometheusRule`.

## Motivation
- While it's possible to customize built-in alerting rules with the `AlertingRule` + `AlertRelabelConfig` CRDs, the process is cumbersome and error-prone. It requires creating YAML manifests manually and there's no practical way to verify the correctness of the configuration. Built-in alerting rules and alerts are still visible in the OCP console after they've been overridden .
- Some operational teams prefer an interactive console and API to manage alerts.
- A unified interface will help users create, clone, disable or silence alerts, view real‑time firing status and preserve changes across upgrades.

### User Stories

1. **Bulk disable that are not required**
   As a cluster administrator, I want to select and disable multiple alerts in one action,

>    so that I can permanently suppress non‑critical notifications and reduce noise.

Author: one is for bulk update and second is for single alert. Its "disable"

>    so that I can permanently suppress non‑critical notifications and reduce noise.

Reviewer: We've talked about it before and my preference would be to limit this capability to platform alerting rules. Otherwise we need to expand how it will function for user-defined rules.

>    so that I can permanently suppress non‑critical notifications and reduce noise.

Author: Updated

4. **Create a custom alerting rule**
   As a cluster admin/developer, I want to create an alerting rule using a form which allows me to specify mandatory fields (PromQL expression, name) and recommended fields (for duration, well-known labels/annotations such as severity, summary).

5. **Clone an alert base on platform or user-defined alerting rule**
   As a cluster admin/developer, I want to clone an alert and update it based on my organization needs.

7. **View silence status on active alerts** - Exists today. Keep Functionality as is.
   As a cluster admin, I want the “Active Alerts” list to show which alerts are currently silenced (and until when),
   so that I have clear visibility into which notifications are suppressed and why.

8. **Create an alerting rule from the Metrics > Observe page** - Currently not in scope
   AS a cluster admin I would like to be able to create an alert directly from the Metrics > Observe page,
   after I used it to tune the expression that I need.

## Goals
1. Add a Console UI for managing alerts.

> 2. Standardize `group` and `component` labels on alert rules to clearly surface priority and impact, to help administrators to understand what to address first.

Author: This is part of the effort. The UI uses these and its part of the MVP.

                                (merges AlertRelabelConfig with Alerts/Rules) \
                                               ^           ^                   \
                                              /            |                    \
                                             v             v                     v
                  +-------------------------+  +-----------------------+  +----------------------+
                  | Kubernetes API Server   |  | Thanos/Prometheus API |  | Alertmanager         |
                  +-------------------------+  +-----------------------+  +----------------------+
                        ^          ^                       ^                          ^
                   CRUD |     CRU  |                       |                          |
                        v          v                       v                          v
               PrometheusRule   AlertRelabelConfig   Alerts/Rules            Silences/Notifications

   Note: Alerts delivery: Prometheus (post‑relabel via AlertRelabelConfig) ---> Alertmanager
```

Key flows:
- Web clients authenticate and access the OpenShift Console UI.

> - Console calls the Alerting API to list/manage alerts and rules.

Reviewer: I had a similar comment above.

7. **View silence status on active alerts** - Exists today. Keep Functionality as is.
   As a cluster admin, I want the “Active Alerts” list to show which alerts are currently silenced (and until when),
   so that I have clear visibility into which notifications are suppressed and why.

8. **Create an alerting rule from the Metrics > Observe page** - Currently not in scope
   AS a cluster admin I would like to be able to create an alert directly from the Metrics > Observe page,
   after I used it to tune the expression that I need.

## Goals
1. Add a Console UI for managing alerts.
2. Standardize `group` and `component` labels on alert rules to clearly surface priority and impact, to help administrators to understand what to address first.
3. CRUD operations on user‑defined alerts via UI and API.
4. Clone platform or user alerts to customize thresholds or scopes.
5. Disable/enable alerts by creating/updating entries in the `AlertRelabelConfig` CR.
6. Create/manage silences in Alertmanager and reflect this in the UI. - Already exists today.
7. Aggregate view of all alerting rules, showing definitions plus relabel context.

> 8. Aggregate view of all alerts, showing status (Pending, Firing, Silenced) and relabel context.

Reviewer 4: Do these two points assume some kind of mapping between the alert/alerting rule and its corresponding relabel context? There's no explicit connection or contract right now if I am not mistaken.

- The **Details** tab will show the name, description, source, group, component, labels, severity, expression, and other information.
- The **Active alerts** tab will show a timeline chart and a list of active alerts.

**Column Management**
- By default, the table will show **Alert rule name**, **Severity**, **State**, **Group**, **Component**, and **Source**.
- Users can add or remove additional columns like **PrometheusRule**, **Created by**, **Last modified**, and **receivers**.
- The **Alert rule name** and **Severity** columns cannot be hidden or reordered.

**Sub-tab: Silence Rules**
- This tab will list all silence rules, whether active, pending, or expired.
- Users can create, expire, delete, or recreate silence rules individually or in bulk.
- The table will show the silence name, state, duration, number of firing alerts being silenced, and the creator.
- Users can create a new silence rule based on alert labels like name, severity, and namespace.
- A toast notification will be presented after the action is completed.

**Sub-tab: Alertmanager**
- This is not in the current scope.

**Sub-tab: Manage Groups**

> - Default groups will include **Impact Group: Cluster** and **Impact Group: Namespace**.

Reviewer 4: Would it make sense for the group values to reflect the `Source` values? `platform` and `user`

Reviewer 4: Nah it doesn't probably make sense. The source and impact are two different things.

- Duplicate and Delete alert rules
- Incident tab

**Should-Have Features:**
- Add components
- Saved filters
- Alert and alert rule side drawer
- Add "Resource" column for node alerts

**Could-Have Features:**
- Notifications (alertmanager receivers)
- PromQL expression autocompletion and graph
- "Save as draft" wizard
- Alert rule history
- Acknowledge alert
- Filter by triggered date/time
- Column management
- Additional alert action items (View logs, Troubleshoot, etc.)
- Generate a summary report
- Generate a dashboard
- Manage groups

**Won't-Have Features:**
- Alertmanager sub-tab

### API Endpoints

Base path: `/api/v1/alerting`

Rule identity

- A rule is uniquely identified by the tuple: `(namespace, prometheusrule, ruleName, specHash)`.
- Canonical opaque identifier used below as `ruleId`:
  - `/namespaces/{namespace}/prometheusrules/{prometheusrule}/rules/{ruleName}/specHash/{specHash}`.
    - `specHash` is server‑generated from the rule spec to ensure uniqueness and stability. It is computed as SHA‑256 (hex, lowercase) of the normalized fields:
      - `expr`: trimmed with consecutive whitespace collapsed
      - `for`: normalized to seconds

>       - `labels`: static labels only; drop empty values; sort by key ascending; join as `key=value` lines separated by `\n`

Author: No variable and Updated to make this clearer.

- Some operational teams prefer an interactive console and API to manage alerts and alerting rules.
- A unified interface will help users create, clone, disable alerting rules or silence alerts, view real‑time firing status and preserve changes across upgrades.

### Problem Statement
Administrators struggle with predefined generic alerting rules that create excessive noise, lack actionable context, and are difficult to configure to match cluster‑specific thresholds, severity levels, and labels.

### User Stories

1. **Disable single or multiple built-in alerting rule**
   As a cluster administrator, I want to disable an out-of-the-box alerting rule permanently, because it's not relevant for my environment (for instance, I don't want to see any alert about resource over-commitment because my cluster is only used for testing).

2. **Replace an existing platform alerting rule by a custom definition.**

>    As a cluster admin, I want to disable existing built‑in alert, clone it and adjust its threshold and severity, and save it as a user‑defined rule, so that I can tailor default monitoring to suit my team’s SLAs without modifying upstream operators.

Author: Well, they will not be able to adjust the of an out-of-the-box alerting rules. The relabeling is done after the alert is already evaluated.
They would only be able to disable the existing alert, clone it and make the expression update to the cloned alert.

I removed the " user‑defined" .

3. **Create a custom alerting rule**
   As a cluster admin or developer, I want to create an alerting rule from the OCP console using a dedicated form which allows me to specify mandatory fields (PromQL expression, name) and recommended fields (for duration, labels/annotations such as severity, summary).

4. ***Clone an alerting rule based on an existing alerting rule (platform or user-defined)**

>    As a cluster admin/developer, I want to clone an alert and update it based on my organization needs.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
   As a cluster admin/developer, I want to clone an alerting rule and update it based on my organization needs.
```

5. **View silence status on active alerts** - Exists today. Keep Functionality as is.
   As a cluster admin, I want the “Active Alerts” list to show which alerts are currently silenced (and until when),
   so that I have clear visibility into which notifications are suppressed and why.

6. **Create an alerting rule from the Metrics > Observe page** - Currently not in scope
   AS a cluster admin I would like to be able to create an alert directly from the Metrics > Observe page,
   after I used it to tune the expression that I need.

## Goals
1. Add a Console UI for managing alerting rules (definitions) — create, edit, clone, disable/enable — without manual YAML edits to the `PrometheusRule` resource holding those rules.

> 2. Standardize `group` and `component` labels on alerting rules to clearly surface priority and impact, to help administrators to understand what to address first.

Author: I now added a dictionary, that also includes details about that.

**Sub-tab: Alerting Rules**

- The table will list **Alerting rule name**, **Severity**, **State**, **Group**, **Component**, and **Source**.
- It will feature comprehensive filtering capabilities for **Search/Keywords**, **Component**, **Severity**, **State**, **Source**, and the Prometheus rule that the alert is associated with.
- Users will be able to filter by when the alert was triggered (e.g., last hour, today, custom range).

**Create an Alerting Rule**
- This will be a wizard-based process.
- Users can add new components, but groups will be non-editable initially.
- The "Append to" selection will determine which Kubernetes PrometheusRule Custom Resource will contain the alert definition. It should also include a default group and allow the user to create/update the group.
- Users can search by namespace or rule name, or create a new Prometheus Rule.
- Expressions will have PromQL autocompletion and a graph showing the results.
- A toast notification will be presented after the action is completed.

**Edit an Alerting Rule**
- For user-defined rules
    - If the PrometheusRule is managed by an operator, the user will only be able to silence the alert.

>     - If the PrometheusRule is managed manually, the pre-populated wizard will allow editing all fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Otherwise the pre-populated wizard will allow editing all fields.
```

- By default, the table will show **Alerting rule name**, **Severity**, **State**, **Group**, **Component**, and **Source**.
- Users can add or remove additional columns like **PrometheusRule**, **Created by**, **Last modified**, and **receivers**.
- The **Alerting rule name** and **Severity** columns cannot be hidden or reordered.

**Sub-tab: Silences**
- This tab will list all silences, whether active, pending, or expired.
- Users can create, expire, delete, or recreate silence rules individually or in bulk.
- The table will show the silence name, state, duration, number of firing alerts being silenced, and the creator.
- Users can create a new silence rule based on alert labels like name, severity, and namespace.
- A toast notification will be presented after the action is completed.

**Sub-tab: Alertmanager**
- This is not in the current scope.

**Sub-tab: Manage Groups**
- Default groups will include **Impact Group: Cluster** and **Impact Group: Namespace**.
- The Cluster group will include components like **control plane nodes**, **etcd**, **network**, and **api server**.
- The Namespace group will include components like **workload** and **worker node**.

> - The ability for users to create additional groups and not rely on platform-created ones is a **Could-Have** feature.

Reviewer: although it's a could-have, where would the information be stored?

                  | Kubernetes API Server   |  | Thanos/Prometheus API |  | Alertmanager         |
                  +-------------------------+  +-----------------------+  +----------------------+
                        ^          ^                       ^                          ^
                   CRUD |     CRU  |                       |                          |
                        v          v                       v                          v
               PrometheusRule   AlertRelabelConfig   Alerts/Rules            Silences/Notifications

   Note: Alerts delivery: Prometheus (post‑relabel via AlertRelabelConfig) ---> Alertmanager
```

Key flows:
- Web clients authenticate and access the OpenShift Console UI.
- Console calls the Alerting API to list/manage alerts and rules.
- Alerting API aggregates rule definitions and alert instances with `AlertRelabelConfig` to present a post‑relabel view (labels, disabled status, effective severity) in list/detail endpoints.
- Alerting API reads/writes `PrometheusRule` and `AlertRelabelConfig` via the Kubernetes API.
- Alerting API queries alerts/rules via Thanos/Prometheus.

Rationale for server‑side aggregation:

> - Centralizes a canonical, post‑relabel “effective view” and transactional write path: computes the merged state once for all clients and mediates validated, conflict‑aware updates to `PrometheusRule` and `AlertRelabelConfig`, preventing drift and duplicated logic across UIs.

Reviewer: > computes the merged state once for all clients

I don't see how it could work since the result depends on the RBAC permissions of individual clients.

      - `for`: normalized to seconds
      - `labels`: Validate labels `key` and `value` meet Prometheus syntax and character rules; drop empty values; sort by key ascending; join as `key=value` lines separated by `\n`
      - Concatenate the three parts with `\n---\n` separators, then hash the UTF‑8 bytes
    - Clients must treat `specHash` as opaque (do not construct it). When `expr`/`for`/labels change, the server recomputes `specHash` and returns an updated `ruleId`.

** Alerting Rules (definitions)**

| Method | Path                                                  | Description                                                                                              | Notes |
|--------|-------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|
| GET    | `/rules`                           | List all alerting rule definitions **(platform and user)**, including `disabled` flags and relabel context. Supports the filter parameters listed below. | **Required** — merges `AlertRelabelConfig` with platform alerting rules.|

> | GET    | `/rules/labels`                    | List common labels across selected rules across  **(platform and user)** alerting rules. | **Required** — merges `AlertRelabelConfig` with platform alerting rules.|

Author: When you pass a list of alerting rules, you will get the common labels.
We will allow the users to check common labels and make bulk updates to add or remove labels.

| POST   | `/rules`                           | Create a new user‑defined alerting rule. | Wraps K8s API for `PrometheusRule`. |
| GET    | `/rules/{ruleId}`                  | Fetch a single rule’s full definition and relabel context. | **Required** — merges `AlertRelabelConfig` with platform alert.|
| PATCH  | `/rules/{ruleId}`                  | Update a single rule (platform or user‑defined). | |
| DELETE | `/rules/{ruleId}`                  | Delete a user‑defined rule. | |
| PATCH  | `/rules`                           | Bulk update rules (e.g., severity/status/labels).  | |
| DELETE | `/rules`                           | Bulk delete user‑defined rules. | |

Filter parameters for `/rules`:

- `name`

> - `group`

Reviewer: I lack details about the format of query parameters. Do we expect the endpoint to be queried like this:

```
http://example.com/api/v1/alerting/rules?namespace=openshift-monitoring
````

- `namespace`
- `component`
- `severity`
- `state` (one of: `enabled`, `disabled`) — rule enablement status. Note: “silenced” is not a rule state.
- `has_silenced_alerts` (boolean) - filter rules that currently have one or more associated alerts silenced. - TBD
- `source`
- `notification_receiver`
- Other alert labels (arbitrary `labelKey=labelValue` pairs)

**Alerts (instances)**

| Method | Path                      | Description                                                                                         | Notes |
|--------|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|
| GET    | `/alerts`                 | List alert instances (Pending / Firing / Silenced) with post‑relabel labels. Supports the filter parameters listed below. | **Required** — merges `AlertRelabelConfig` with platform alerts. |

Filter parameters for `/alerts`:

- `name`
- `group`
- `component`
- `severity`
- `state` (one of: `firing`, `pending`, `silenced`)
- `source` (platform, user-defined)
- `notification_receiver`
- `triggered_since`

> - Other alert labels (arbitrary `labelKey=labelValue` pairs)

Reviewer: same remarks apply here

- Platform alerting rules cannot be update directly. Modify platform alerting rules behavior via `AlertRelabelConfig` CRs in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace.
- Platform alerting rules can be Enabled/Disabled in the UI - which translate to a `drop` action in the `AlertRelabelConfig` CR for the alerting rule and an additional label.

### Migration
- Existing alerting rules should have an indication of missing recommended labels in the UI.

### GitOps / Argo CD Compliance
- All generated `PrometheusRule` and `AlertRelabelConfig` resources remain declarative and suitable for committing to Git

### Workflow Description

## Pain Points Addressed by this Design
- **Generic and Non-Actionable Alerts:** The design will provide more actions from an alert and link to resources like logs and Korrel8r for troubleshooting.
- **Alert Noise and Data Overload:** Grouping, advanced filters, and saved filters will help reduce noise and the need for repetitive filtering.
- **Missed Alarms or Missing Data:** Users will be able to create flexible alert definitions directly in the UI to monitor any data type, configure notifications, and link a runbook.

## Pain Points Not Directly Addressed

> - High Resource Consumption of Observability Tools

Reviewer: IMHO it can be removed since unrelated to the discussion

- Clicking on a link within the summary will automatically filter the main table by the selected group and severity (e.g., clicking on the number of critical alerts under 'core' will filter the table by `Group: Cluster` and `Severity: Critical`).

**Table**
- The table will list all firing alert messages.
- It will have multiple sorting options: primary sort by **Severity**, secondary by **Group**, and tertiary by **Component**.
- If a user switches to a specific group tab, the **Component** will become the secondary sort.
- The table will be responsive; on smaller screens, some names will be shortened and the **State** column will be automatically hidden as needed.

**Comprehensive Filtering Capabilities**
- Filters will be available for **Groups**, **Component**, **Severity**, **State**, **Source**, and **Triggered date/time**.
- **Saved filters** will be stored per account and users will be able to save, edit, delete, and arrange the order of the menu.

**Column Management**
- The default columns will be **Alert name**, **Severity**, **Total** (if aggregated), **State**, **Group**, **Component**, and **Source**.

> - Users can manage the view by adding columns like **Description** and **Start-End**.

Reviewer: (nit) there's no end date for firing alerts

- The **Alert name** and **Severity** columns cannot be hidden or reordered.

**Alert Rows**
- Alerts will be aggregated by name and severity by default.
- Expanding an alert will show all alerts with the same name.
- Individual alerts will be clickable to view full details.
- Individual alert columns will display **Alert name**, **Severity**, **State**, **Source**, and **Namespace**.
- A **Resource** column with a link to the node resource page will appear for node alerts.

**Actions**

> - Actions will be available to **View alerting rule**, **Acknowledge an alert**, and **Silence alert**.

Reviewer: Do we still talk about "alert acknowledgement"?

- All actions will trigger a toast notification upon completion.

**Alert Details**
- Details will be presented in a side drawer, allowing users to navigate between alerts without losing context.
- The side drawer will include a **Details** tab and a **YAML** tab.

**Bulk Actions**
- Users will be able to **Silence selected alerts**.

**Kebab Menu Options**
- The menu will include options to **Generate a summary report** and **Generate a dashboard** (via Perses integration).

---

#### Management Tab
This tab will include sub-tabs for **Alert rules**, **Silence rules**, and **Manage groups**.

**Sub-tab: Alert Rules**

- The table will list **Alert rule name**, **Severity**, **State**, **Group**, **Component**, and **Source**.
- It will feature comprehensive filtering capabilities for **Search/Keywords**, **Component**, **Severity**, **State**, **Source**, **Notification receiver**, and the Prometheus rule that the alert is associated with.
- Users will be able to filter by when the alert was triggered (e.g., last hour, today, custom range).

**Create an Alert Rule**
- This will be a wizard-based process.
- Users can add new components, but groups will be non-editable initially.

> - The "Append to" selection will determine which Kubernetes PrometheusRule Custom Resource will contain the alert definition.

Reviewer: it's also mandatory to specify to which the group within the PrometheusRule resource the rule gets added (or if a new group should be created).

- Users can search by namespace or rule name, or create a new Prometheus Rule.
- Expressions will have PromQL autocompletion and a graph showing the results.
- A toast notification will be presented after the action is completed.

**Edit an Alert Rule**

> - For user-defined rules, the pre-populated wizard will allow editing all fields except the PrometheusRule selector.

Author: Not sure what Shiri meant. I updated this and also added how we address alerts that their PrometheusRule is managed by an operator.

- The **Details** tab will show the name, description, source, group, component, labels, severity, expression, and other information.
- The **Active alerts** tab will show a timeline chart and a list of active alerts.

**Column Management**
- By default, the table will show **Alert rule name**, **Severity**, **State**, **Group**, **Component**, and **Source**.
- Users can add or remove additional columns like **PrometheusRule**, **Created by**, **Last modified**, and **receivers**.
- The **Alert rule name** and **Severity** columns cannot be hidden or reordered.

**Sub-tab: Silence Rules**
- This tab will list all silence rules, whether active, pending, or expired.
- Users can create, expire, delete, or recreate silence rules individually or in bulk.
- The table will show the silence name, state, duration, number of firing alerts being silenced, and the creator.
- Users can create a new silence rule based on alert labels like name, severity, and namespace.
- A toast notification will be presented after the action is completed.

**Sub-tab: Alertmanager**
- This is not in the current scope.

**Sub-tab: Manage Groups**

> - Default groups will include **Impact Group: Cluster** and **Impact Group: Namespace**.

Author: They explain the impact scope. And the component tells about the impacted part.

> - Default groups will include **Impact Group: Cluster** and **Impact Group: Namespace**.

Author: They enable the calculation of a per component health and from it the calculation of the cluster health.

                        ^          ^                       ^                          ^
                   CRUD |     CRU  |                       |                          |
                        v          v                       v                          v
               PrometheusRule   AlertRelabelConfig   Alerts/Rules            Silences/Notifications

   Note: Alerts delivery: Prometheus (post‑relabel via AlertRelabelConfig) ---> Alertmanager
```

Key flows:
- Web clients authenticate and access the OpenShift Console UI.
- Console calls the Alerting API to list/manage alerts and rules.
- Alerting API aggregates rule definitions and alert instances with `AlertRelabelConfig` to present a post‑relabel view (labels, disabled status, effective severity) in list/detail endpoints.
- Alerting API reads/writes `PrometheusRule` and `AlertRelabelConfig` via the Kubernetes API.
- Alerting API queries alerts/rules via Thanos/Prometheus.

Rationale for server‑side aggregation:
- Enforces RBAC and validation uniformly using the user’s bearer token forwarded by the console backend; no credentials are stored.

> - Provides a consistent, post‑relabel “effective view” and write surface that merges `PrometheusRule` with `AlertRelabelConfig` (e.g., disables, severity changes).

Reviewer: same remark here

- Improves performance by avoiding client fan‑out and doing normalization, filtering, and pagination on the server.

Note: This component can be implemented as part of the existing console backend/gateway rather than a standalone service; the requirement is server‑side aggregation, not a separate deployment.

### Proposed UI in OpenShift Console

See additional detailes in the [UX Design- Alerts management](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1bB7kg-W2lLq85Dmy530STMUWJFlNPFvg08Sayc-RwK8/edit?usp=sharing)

- **Management List**: show all alerting rules; filter/sort by name, severity, namespace, status, labels; saved searches
![Alerting -> Management](assets/alerts-management-ui.png)

- **Alerts View**: show current firing/pending instances, silence status, relabel context
![Alerting -> Alerts](assets/alerts-management-ui2.png)

- **Create/Edit Alert Form**: fields for Alert Name, Summary, Description, Duration, Severity, Labels, Annotations (runbook links), Group & Component labels
![Alerting -> Create new Alert Rule](assets/alerts-management-ui3.png)
![Alerting -> Update Platform Alert](assets/alerts-management-ui4.png)

> - **Create/Edit Alert labels Form**: list common labels, Add/remove alert labels.

Reviewer: is this feature listed earlier?

- **Silences List**: define matchers, duration, comment - Keep

### Additional Points to Consider
---

**RBAC**
- The approach is to filter alerts based on a user's namespace access.
- Administrators will have an "all namespaces" option.
- The UI will include a dropdown menu for users to select a specific namespace.
- The possibility of using "permissions by labels" is mentioned for further exploration.

**Terminology Alignments**

> - There is a need for consistent terminology, such as Namespace vs. project and Alert rule vs. alert definition.

Reviewer: It would be good to have a small section at the top explaining
* PrometheusRule
* Alerting rule
* Alert
* Silence
* ...

---

### Feature Prioritization

The features are prioritized using tags: **Must-Have**, **Should-Have**, **Could-Have**, and **Won't-Have**.

**Must-Have Features:**
- Tabs changes (Alerts, Management: Alert rules, Silence rules)
- Create user-defined alert rules (Alert rules definition and Metadata)
- Advanced filtering capabilities
- Bulk actions: disable, edit labels, edit component
- Duplicate and Delete alert rules
- Incident tab

**Should-Have Features:**
- Add components
- Saved filters
- Alert and alert rule side drawer
- Add "Resource" column for node alerts

**Could-Have Features:**
- Notifications (alertmanager receivers)
- PromQL expression autocompletion and graph
- "Save as draft" wizard
- Alert rule history
- Acknowledge alert
- Filter by triggered date/time
- Column management
- Additional alert action items (View logs, Troubleshoot, etc.)
- Generate a summary report
- Generate a dashboard
- Manage groups

**Won't-Have Features:**
- Alertmanager sub-tab

### API Endpoints

Base path: `/api/v1/alerting`

Rule identity

> - A rule is uniquely identified by the tuple: `(namespace, prometheusrule, ruleName, specHash)`.

Author: yes

- Canonical opaque identifier used below as `ruleId`:
  - `/namespaces/{namespace}/prometheusrules/{prometheusrule}/rules/{ruleName}/specHash/{specHash}`.
    - `specHash` is server‑generated from the rule spec to ensure uniqueness and stability. It is computed as SHA‑256 (hex, lowercase) of the normalized fields:
      - `expr`: trimmed with consecutive whitespace collapsed
      - `for`: normalized to seconds
      - `labels`: Validate labels `key` and `value` meet Prometheus syntax and character rules; drop empty values; sort by key ascending; join as `key=value` lines separated by `\n`
      - Concatenate the three parts with `\n---\n` separators, then hash the UTF‑8 bytes
    - Clients must treat `specHash` as opaque (do not construct it). When `expr`/`for`/labels change, the server recomputes `specHash` and returns an updated `ruleId`.

**Alerts (instances)**

| Method | Path                      | Description                                                                                         | Notes |
|--------|---------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|

> | GET    | `/alerts`                 | List alert instances (Pending / Firing / Silenced) with post‑relabel labels. Supports the filter parameters listed below. | **Required** — merges `AlertRelabelConfig` with platform alerts. |

Author: @simonpasquier @jgbernalp I would like to drop this API in favor of an metric that will report this information.
The metric would report all pending, firing and pending alerts after relabeling. They will include the rule_id and the value will report the activeAt its the value(timestamp_seconds).
I believe this would be faster and more scaleable if we consider the multi cluster use case.

Example of the metric output:
alerts_effective_active_at_timestamp_seconds{alertname=.., alertstatus=.., namespace-.., node=.., group=.., component=.., rule_id=..}
Would it be possible to collect this metric in shorter intervals to MCOA Thanos?
Please let me know if you agree.

Filter parameters for `/alerts`:

- `name`
- `group`
- `component`
- `severity`
- `state` (one of: `firing`, `pending`, `silenced`)
- `source` (platform, user-defined)
- `notification_receiver`
- `triggered_since`
- Other alert labels (arbitrary `labelKey=labelValue` pairs)

**Rules (definitions)**

| Method | Path                                                  | Description                                                                                              | Notes |
|--------|-------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|

> | GET    | `/rules`                           | List all alert rule definitions **(platform and user)**, including `disabled` flags and relabel context. Supports the filter parameters listed below. | **Required** — merges `AlertRelabelConfig` with platform alerts.|

Author: Hi @simonpasquier @jgbernalp , @jan--f I would like to drop the following APIs:
- `GET /rules`
-  `GET /rules/labels`
-  `GET /rules/{ruleId}` 

 in favor of persisting an aggregated relabeled alerting rules list in a ConfigMap.

I believe this would enable the UI to use the plain k8s API in the single cluster and in ACM it can be tracked by the ACM searched and used by the UI.

Please let me know if you agree.

Reviewer 5: The goal was to allow the UI to use the same APIs for single or multi cluster contexts, by having the backend abstract away the complexities and aggregations. Also we might loose the independent access control for rules if all of them are in a single ConfigMap, for cluster with multiple rules loading a single ConfigMap will affect performance.

Reviewer 5: We need to sync with the ACM team in terms how this is currently being managed, this does not answer what happens when a user wants to manage a specific alert, how do we control access? Is that a requirement?. Currently the alerts have the information of the cluster they come from as a label.

| PATCH  | `/rules/{ruleId}`                  | Update a single rule (platform or user‑defined). | |
| DELETE | `/rules/{ruleId}`                  | Delete a user‑defined rule. | |
| POST   | `/rules`                           | Bulk update rules (e.g., severity/status/labels).  | |
| DELETE | `/rules`                           | Bulk delete user‑defined rules. | |

Filter parameters for `/rules`:

- `name`
- `group`
- `namespace`
- `component`
- `severity`
- `state` (one of: `enabled`, `disabled`) — rule enablement status. Note: “silenced” is not a rule state.
- `has_silenced_alerts` (boolean) - filter rules that currently have one or more associated alerts silenced. - TBD
- `source`
- `notification_receiver`
- Other alert labels (arbitrary `labelKey=labelValue` pairs)

**Health**

| Method | Path        | Description                 | Notes |
|--------|-------------|-----------------------------|-------|
| GET    | `/health`   | Basic health‑check endpoint |       |

### Data Model
- Store user alerts in `PrometheusRule`s in the specified project.
- Update platform alerts by writing relabel rules into the `AlertRelabelConfig` CR in `cluster-monitoring-config`.

> - Use labels for disable/enable flags; rely on existing CRDs - Applies only for Platform alert rules.

Reviewer: I don't think that we have this functionality fully described in the document.

### Migration
- Automated tool to detect existing `PrometheusRule` CRDs and import them into the new system
- Preserve existing labels, annotations and support rollback on errors

### GitOps / Argo CD Compliance
- All generated `PrometheusRule` and `AlertRelabelConfig` resources remain declarative and suitable for committing to Git

### Workflow Description

## Pain Points Addressed by this Design
- **Generic and Non-Actionable Alerts:** The design will provide more actions from an alert and link to resources like logs and Korrel8r for troubleshooting.
- **Alert Noise and Data Overload:** Grouping, advanced filters, and saved filters will help reduce noise and the need for repetitive filtering.
- **Missed Alarms or Missing Data:** Users will be able to create flexible alert definitions directly in the UI to monitor any data type, configure notifications, and link a runbook.

## Pain Points Not Directly Addressed
- High Resource Consumption of Observability Tools
- Lack of Unified Views (within a single-cluster scope)

## Risks & Mitigations
- **Performance**: split large rule sets into multiple CRs; benchmark reconciliation latency

> - **Misconfiguration**: validate syntax; prevent disabling protected base alerts via exclusion list

Reviewer: why would we want to prevent alert disabling?

Author: We can drop this for now and see if we get requests for adding this.
The idea is to put some guardrail, but I agree it might be pre-nature.

- **Complexity**: sensible defaults; UI guidance; limit advanced options in MVP

## Graduation Criteria

> - **Tech Preview**: basic CRUD, clone, disable/enable, silencing via UI/API; migration tool v1

Reviewer: How would users enable the feature when tech-preview? Feaure gates work well for new CRDs, less for features which aren't tied to CRDs.

- **GA**: best‑practice guidance in UI; multi‑namespace filtering; full test coverage; complete documentation

## Open Questions
1. **Per‑Alert vs. Single‑File**: Should each user‑defined alert reside in its own `PrometheusRule` file, or group all into one? A customer noted per‑alert files may simplify GitOps/Argo CD maintenance—does that hold true at scale? - Agreed that this would be up to the user to define.
2. **Read‑Only Detection**: Which annotations, labels or ownerReferences reliably indicate GitOps‑managed resources to render them read‑only in our UI?

> 3. **Concurrent Operator Updates**: How should we handle cases where upstream operators update their own `PrometheusRule` CRs—should we reconcile `AlertRelabelConfig` entries periodically? - [simonpasquier] Replied that, as of now, the cluster admin will need to detect the drift and update their customization.

Reviewer: correct at least for MVP. We could store a hash of the original definition, compare this to the actual definition and provide a notification to the user (e.g. "the definition of rule XYZ that you've customized has changed") but it would be the responsibility of the user to decide what they want to do (drop the override, adjust it or do nothing).

- Users can create a new silence rule based on alert labels like name, severity, and namespace.
- A toast notification will be presented after the action is completed.

**Sub-tab: Alertmanager**
- This is not in the current scope.

**Sub-tab: Manage Groups**
- Default groups will include **Impact Group: Cluster** and **Impact Group: Namespace**.
- The Cluster group will include components like **control plane nodes**, **etcd**, **network**, and **api server**.
- The Namespace group will include components like **workload** and **worker node**.
- The ability for users to create additional groups and not rely on platform-created ones is a **Could-Have** feature.

## Non‑Goals
- Deep RBAC beyond native Kubernetes permissions.
- Operators reacting to user modifications (operator code remains unchanged).
- Full multi‑cluster federation (initial focus is single‑cluster).

## Related Enhancement Proposals
- https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/monitoring/alert-overrides.md
- https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/monitoring/user-workload-monitoring.md

## Terminology

> - **Alerting rule**: An alert definition. It includes a PromQL expression and an optional `for` duration and labels/annotations that emits alerts when true. Defined within a `PrometheusRule` resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Alerting rule**: An alert definition. It includes a PromQL expression and an optional `for` duration and labels/annotations. The rule triggers alerts when the expression returns data. It is defined within a `group of a PrometheusRule` resource which are evaluated by Prometheus or Thanos Ruler.
```

- **Alerts**: Runtime instances generated by an alerting rule when its condition is met. States include Pending, Firing, and Resolved; alerts may be silenced in Alertmanager.

> - **Platform stack**: The cluster monitoring stack in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace, managed by Red Hat–supported operators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Platform monitoring stack**: The cluster monitoring stack in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace, managed by the Cluster Monitoring operator. It is meant to collect metrics and evaluate rules from Red Hat certified operators.
```

> - **User stack (User Workload Monitoring, UWM)**: The user monitoring stack for application namespaces; resources live in user namespaces and are not managed by Red Hat‑supported operators.

Reviewer: (nit) UWM is the internal name which isn't mentioned in user-facing docs
```suggestion
- **User-defined monitoring stack**: The user monitoring stack for user workloads. It is meant to collect metrics and evaluate rules from applications in user namespaces.
```

- **PrometheusRule (CRD)**: Kubernetes Custom Resource (`monitoring.coreos.com/v1`) used to define alerting and recording rules. Used by both platform and user stacks.
- **AlertRelabelConfig (CRD)**: OpenShift Custom Resource to relabel or drop platform alerts without changing upstream rule definitions; used to disable/enable platform alerts and adjust labels.
- **Labels**: Key/value pairs used for grouping, filtering, and routing.

> - **source label**: The origin of the alerting rule/alert (platform vs user).

Author: The same label as today. Its just to clarify terminology that we use in this document.

## Summary
This feature extends the OCP console to manage alerts end‑to‑end, beyond just Silencing them.
It enable users to create, edit, clone, disable and enable alerting rules.

In addition, It lets us measure health per component, group components by impact `layer` (Cluster, Namespace), and roll those up into an overall cluster health derived from the Cluster components.

## Background

### OpenShift Virtualization operator health labels

This proposal builds on existing OpenShift Virtualization alert conventions that use labels to express alert ownership and alert impact. Those conventions have proven useful for calculating operator health and for presenting alerts with consistent metadata.

In OpenShift Virtualization alerting rules, common labels include:

- `kubernetes_operator_part_of`: identifies the higher-level product or organization that owns the alert (e.g., `kubevirt`)
- `kubernetes_operator_component`: identifies the specific operator or sub-component that reports the alert (e.g., `hyperconverged-cluster-operator`, `kubevirt`)

> - `operator_health_impact`: indicates the impact of a firing alert on the operator health calculation (values such as `critical`, `warning`, `none`)

Reviewer 6: I had the same question. It doesn't seem ideal to have two ways of defining essential `how important is this alert`.

> In the new architecture we changed the labels, So they define the component and layer they impact, which is a better approach.

So we're no longer expecting to set the `operator_health_impact` ? Then we can probably update the text here.

> - `operator_health_impact`: indicates the impact of a firing alert on the operator health calculation (values such as `critical`, `warning`, `none`)

Author: Hi, This describes legacy implementation. That is why its in the `Background` section.
Current suggestion doesnt use `operator_health_impact`, it uses the layer and component labels.

4. Clone platform or user alerting rules to customize thresholds or scopes.
5. Disable/re-enable platform alerting rules by creating/deleting entries in the `AlertRelabelConfig` CR.
6. Create/manage silences in Alertmanager and reflect this in the UI. - Already exists today.
7. Aggregate view of all alerting rules, showing definitions plus relabel context.
8. Aggregate view of all alerts, showing status (Pending, Firing, Silenced) and relabel context.
9. Enforce multi‑tenancy: restrict queries to user’s namespace or cluster scope.
10. Persist user changes through operator upgrades, without modifying existing operators or CRDs.
11. Stay fully GitOps/Argo CD compliant: managed resources must remain commit‑able and, when owned by a GitOps application, appear read-only.

The primary goal is to provide a comprehensive alerting management UI that directly addresses the problems identified through user feedback, research, and competitive analysis. The proposed features are intended to reduce alert noise, provide more actionable insights, and improve the overall user experience for monitoring and responding to issues.

## Proposed Features

#### User Interface

> The user interface will be redesigned, with a new **Observe > Alerting** page that highlights new grouping and components functionality.

Reviewer: More a question for @jgbernalp but shouldn't there be a way for users to switch between the old and new UI?

- Users will be able to filter by when the alert was triggered (e.g., last hour, today, custom range).

**Create an Alerting Rule**
- This will be a wizard-based process.
- Users can add new components. The layer is chosen from the predefined set of allowed values.
- The "Append to" selection will determine which Kubernetes PrometheusRule Custom Resource will contain the alert definition. It should also include a default layer selection.
- Users can search by namespace or rule name, or create a new Prometheus Rule.
- Expressions will have PromQL autocompletion and a graph showing the results.
- A toast notification will be presented after the action is completed.

**Edit an Alerting Rule**
- For user-defined rules
    - If the PrometheusRule is managed by an operator, the user will only be able to silence the alert.
    - If the PrometheusRule is managed manually, the pre-populated wizard will allow editing all fields.
- For platform-defined rules, the wizard will have limited editable fields.
- A toast notification will be presented after the action is completed.

**Alerting Rule Actions**

> - Users can **Disable/Enable** alerting rules using a toggle switch or kebab menu.

Reviewer: Is this limited to platform alerting rules?

                  +-------------------------+  +-----------------------+  +----------------------+
                  | Kubernetes API Server   |  | Thanos/Prometheus API |  | Alertmanager         |
                  +-------------------------+  +-----------------------+  +----------------------+
                        ^          ^                       ^                          ^
                   CRUD |     CRU  |                       |                          |
                        v          v                       v                          v
               PrometheusRule   AlertRelabelConfig   Alerts/Rules            Silences/Notifications

   Note: Alerts delivery: Prometheus (post‑relabel using AlertRelabelConfig) ---> Alertmanager
```

Key flows:
- Web clients authenticate and access the OpenShift Console UI.
- Console calls the Alerting API to list/manage alerts and rules.
- Alerting API aggregates rule definitions and alert instances with `AlertRelabelConfig` to present a post‑relabel view (labels, disabled status, effective severity) in list/detail endpoints.
- Alerting API reads/writes `PrometheusRule` and `AlertRelabelConfig` using the Kubernetes API.

> - Alerting API queries alerts/rules using Thanos/Prometheus.

Author: Corrected the port to 9093 (confirmed in the code: DefaultThanosQuerierTenancyRulesPort = 9093). The endpoint is selected based on whether the request is cluster-scoped (admin → 9091 unrestricted) or namespace-scoped (developer → 9093 tenant-aware).

> - Alerting API queries alerts/rules using Thanos/Prometheus.

Author: done

Rationale for server‑side aggregation:
- Centralizes a canonical, post‑relabel “effective view” and transactional write path: computes the merged state once for all clients and mediates validated, conflict‑aware updates to `PrometheusRule` and `AlertRelabelConfig`, preventing drift and duplicated logic across UIs.

> - Improves performance by avoiding client fan‑out and doing normalization and filtering on the server.

Author: You're right that per-request traffic to Thanos/Prometheus is not reduced — each query still requires forwarding the caller's token, so the same requests happen regardless.

The value of the server-side component isn't traffic reduction — it's consolidating the post-query processing logic that would otherwise be duplicated in every consumer:

1. Relabel evaluation — merging PrometheusRule definitions with AlertRelabelConfig state to compute the "effective" view. This computation is user-independent and is cached once, avoiding repeated relabel evaluation per client.
2. Rule identity hashing — computing stable rule IDs from (name, expression, duration, labels) so that disable/enable, classification overrides, and alert-to-rule correlation all use a single consistent identity.
3. Classification enrichment — mapping rules to component/layer based on PrometheusRule ownership annotations.
4. Multi-source merging — correlating rule definitions (from Thanos /api/v1/rules) with alert instances (from Alertmanager) and CRD state (PrometheusRule, AlertRelabelConfig, AlertingRule) into a single response.

Without this, each UI consumer (OCP console, ACM, etc.) would need to independently implement all of the above, leading to divergent behavior. The Kubernetes API calls (watches on PrometheusRule, AlertRelabelConfig CRDs) are also done once by the backend's service account rather than per-client.

I've updated the rationale in the document to remove the "merged state once" wording and instead focus on these concrete benefits.

> - Improves performance by avoiding client fan‑out and doing normalization and filtering on the server.

Reviewer: > The Kubernetes API calls (watches on PrometheusRule, AlertRelabelConfig CRDs) are also done once by the backend's service account rather than per-client.

Does it mean that we're bypassing user RBAC permissions?

![Alerting -> Update Platform Alert](assets/alerts-management-ui4.png)

- **Bulk create/edit Alerting rules labels Form**: list common labels, Add/remove alert labels.
- **Silences List**: define matchers, duration, comment - Keep

### Additional Points to Consider

**RBAC**
- The approach is to filter alerts based on a user's namespace access.
- Administrators will have an "all namespaces" option.
- The UI will include a dropdown menu for users to select a specific namespace.

**Alertmanager Notifications Improvements**
- Future improvements could include notifications by layer and component type, and notifications per team (RBAC related).

**Multi-cluster View**
- A separate design task (HPUX-795) is in progress for a multi-cluster alerting UI.
- The main difference is the scope of data presented, providing a centralized, aggregated view for a fleet of clusters compared to a single cluster's data.
- Key features for a multi-cluster view include a **Centralized View**, a **Cluster-Specific Context** filter and **Aggregated per Cluster Health View** .

### Topology Considerations

#### Hypershift / Hosted Control Planes

> - Alerting API runs in the management cluster. It targets guest clusters using Thanos/Prometheus endpoints exposed by HCP.

Author: removed this section. not relevant

- Namespace scoping and source labels remain the same. RBAC aligns to the management console user mappings.

#### Standalone Clusters
- All components (Console, Alerting API, Prometheus/Thanos, Alertmanager) run in-cluster.
- No changes beyond this proposal.

#### Single-node Deployments or MicroShift
- Same APIs.

#### OpenShift Kubernetes Engine

> - Feature supported when monitoring stack is installed.

Author: updated

### Feature Prioritization

The features are prioritized using tags: **Must-Have**, **Should-Have**, **Could-Have**, and **Won't-Have**.

**Must-Have Features:**
- Tabs changes (Alerts, Management: Alerting rules, Silence rules)
- Create user-defined alerting rules (Alerting rules definition and Metadata)
- Advanced filtering capabilities
- Bulk actions: disable, edit labels, edit component
- Duplicate and Delete alerting rules
- Incident tab

**Should-Have Features:**
- Add components
- Saved filters
- Alert and alerting rule side drawer
- Add "Resource" column for node alerts

**Could-Have Features:**
- Notifications (alertmanager receivers)
- PromQL expression autocompletion and graph
- "Save as draft" wizard
- Alerting rule history
- Acknowledge alert
- Filter by triggered date/time
- Column management
- Additional alert action items (View logs, Troubleshoot, etc.)
- Generate a summary report
- Generate a dashboard
- Manage layers

**Won't-Have Features:**
- Alertmanager sub-tab

### API Endpoints

> Base path: `/api/v1/alerting`

Author: Using `/api/v1/alerting` intentionally to avoid path collisions with upstream Prometheus/Thanos endpoints (/api/v1/rules, /api/v1/alerts) that the same cluster may expose. Added a note in the document explaining the rationale.

| PATCH  | `/rules`                           | Bulk update rules (e.g., severity/status/labels).  | |
| DELETE | `/rules`                           | Bulk delete user‑defined rules. | |

Examples for platform operator-managed alerting rules:

- Disable a built-in platform alerting rule:

```http
PATCH /api/v1/alerting/rules/{ruleId}
Content-Type: application/json

{ "state": "disabled" }
```

The server persists the disablement using an `AlertRelabelConfig` CR (drop).

- Restore a built-in platform alerting rule:

```http
PATCH /api/v1/alerting/rules/{ruleId}
Content-Type: application/json

{ "state": "enabled" }
```

The server restores the original behavior by removing the corresponding `AlertRelabelConfig` customization.

Filter parameters for `/rules`:

- Query format
  - Scalars (single or comma-separated list for OR): `name`, `namespace`, `component`, `layer`, `severity`, `source`, `state`, `has_silenced_alerts`
    - Example: `?namespace=openshift-monitoring`
    - Example (OR within a key): `?severity=critical,warning`

>   - Label filters: `label.<key>=<value>` (repeat per key)

Reviewer: I'd use label matchers as in the upstream API:
https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/api/#rules

Author: fixed and also implemented in the code

    - Example: `?label.team=sre&label.env=prod`

>   - Semantics: AND across different keys, OR within a key’s comma list

Author: Adopted upstream Prometheus match[] conventions. Replaced the comma-separated format with match[] parameters supporting equality, inequality, regex, and negative-regex matchers as you suggested.

  - Unknown params are ignored. Invalid values return 400
  - Pagination (server-side):
    - `limit=<int>`: maximum items to return
    - `continue=<opaque>`: cursor for next page (returned by the previous response)
    - Example: `?namespace=openshift-monitoring&limit=50`
  - Sorting:
    - `sort=<field[:asc|desc]>(,<field[:asc|desc]>)*`
    - Example: `?sort=severity:desc,name:asc`
    - Common fields: `name`, `namespace`, `severity`, `layer`, `component`, `source`, `state`

- `name`
- `layer`
- `namespace`
- `component`
- `severity`
- `state` (one of: `enabled`, `disabled`) — rule enablement status. Note: “silenced” is not a rule state.
- `has_silenced_alerts` (boolean) - filter rules that currently have one or more associated alerts silenced. - TBD
- `source`

> - `notification_receiver`

Author: removed
